GETTING TO EQUAL:
THE DISABILITY 
INCLUSION 

ADVANTAGE
A research report produced jointly by
2ﬁPersons with disabilities present business 
and industry with unique opportunities in 

labor-force diversity and corporate culture, 

and they™re a large consumer market eager to 

know which businesses authentically support 

their goals and dreams. Leading companies 

are accelerating disability inclusion as the 

next frontier of corporate social responsibility 

and mission-driven investing.ﬂ
Œ  Ted Kennedy, Jr.,
  Disabilities Rights Attorney,
 Connecticut State Senator and 
Board Chair, American Association of People with Disabilities
3Introduction

a critical talent pool? At a time when there are more job openings in 

the U.S. than workers, you™d want to know more, wouldn™t you?






New research from Accenture, in partnership with Disability:IN and the 
American Association of People with Disabilities (AAPD), reveals that 

companies that embrace best practices for employing and supporting 

more persons with disabilities in their workforce have outperformed 

their peers.
In large part, companies haven™t leveraged the talents of persons with 
disabilities for three reasons:
Ł  A lack of understanding of the scope of the t
alent available;

Ł  Misconceptions about the cost versus the R
OI of disability inclusion.But leading companies that are working successfully toward disability



the research shows that leading companies were, on average, twice 

as likely to have higher total shareholder returns than those of their 

peer group.
4A Vast, Untapped Market
Despite the strength of the U.S. labor 
market, persons with disabilities
1 are 
strikingly under-employed. As of July 2018, 

only 29 percent of Americans of working age 

(between ages 16 and 64) with disabilities 

participated in the workforce, compared 

with 75 percent of Americans without a 

disability. In 2017, the unemployment rate 

for persons with disabilities was more than 



percent versus 4.2 percent.  
There are 15.1 million people of working 
age living with disabilities in the U.S., so 

the research suggests that if companies 

embrace disability inclusion, they will gain 

access to a new talent pool of more than
 
10.7 million people. 


strengthen our busine
sses and our economy. 
According to other research cited within 

this report, employees with disabilities 



innovation, improved productivity and a 

better work environment. And, of course, 

workers are consumers, too. The GDP could 

get a boost up to $25 billion if just 1 percent 

more of persons with disabilities joined the 

U.S. labor force.
The good news, according to our analysis, 


employing persons with disabilities and 

initiating and developing their disability 

inclusion programs.
Figure 1: A Wide Employment Gap
Persons with disabilities are much less likely to be employed.
Population (between ages 16 and 64) by labor-force 
status and disability status, July 2018
0%10%20%
30%40%
50%
60%
70%
80%
90%100%Employed
DisabilityNo DisabilityUnemployed
Not in Workforce
68%
29%
3%22%
75%
3%Source: A
ccenture analysis based on data from the Bureau of Labor Statistics, July 2018
1

that substantially limits one or more major life activities; has a record of such an impairment; or is regarded as having such an impairment. The ADA 
was amended in 2008 and became effective January 1, 2009. The
 ADAAA
 requires a broader interpretation of disability by schools, testing agencies 

and employers than the original law. 
5Accenture™s internal disability champions network of more than 16,000 employees 
worldwide helps colleagues feel included at work.
A Market Worth Targeting

with disabilities as the third-largest market segment in the U.S., after 

Hispanics and African-Americans. The discretionary income for working-



African-American and Hispanic segments combined.
22 A hidden market: The purchasing power of working-age adults with disabilities, American Institutes for Research, April, 2018
6Disability Inclusion and 
the Bottom Line

the past four years to unearth best-in-







elite group of 45 companies that excelled 

in these key categories, which we are 

calling Disability Inclusion Champions (or 

ﬁChampionsﬂ). They make up 32 percent of the 

140 U.S. companies that are part of this study. 

(See ﬁAbout the Researchﬂ for more details.)
Our analysis focused on two important 







margin). 



other companies in the sample, performing 



achieved Œ on average Œ 28 percent higher 

revenue, double the net income and 30 


3 over 

05101520253530N=140 (unique respondents to DEI survey 2015-2018)
10-20
20-30
30-40
40-50
50-60
70-80
80-90
90-100
Number of Companies
Disability InclusionChampionsFigure 2:  A Deep Dive into the DEI
A new

Disability Inclusion Champions for their unique leadership in disability inclusion.

The Disability Equality Index 
Disability:IN, in partnership with the 
American Association for People with 

Disabilities, produces the 
Disability 




benchmarking tool that gives U.S. businesses 

an objective score on their disability 

inclusion policies and practices. It measures 

and weighs a wide range of criteria across 
key best practice categories: culture and 

leadership; community engagement and 

support service; employment practices; 

enterprise-wide access and supplier diversity 

(not included in this analysis). Companies 



with annual revenues of the total sample 

averaging $43 billion. 
3 
7

$0$10$20
$30$40
$50
$60ChampionsRevenue
US$ (Billion)Others
$50
+28%
$39$0$1.0
$2.0
$3.0
$4.0
$5.0
$6.0
ChampionsNet IncomeUS$ (Billion)Others
$5.7
2x$2.7
0%2%4%6%10%8%14%
18%
16%12%ChampionsEconomic Profit Margin
Percentage
Others
16%
+30%
12%
account for temporal and industry variation; see Appendix for more detail on methodology.


Moreover, Disability Inclusion Champions 
were, on average, two times more likely 

to outperform their peers in terms of total 

shareholder returns compared with the rest 

of the sample.

Champion, strengthening its commitment to 

persons with disabilities makes a difference: 
2xChampions were 
twice as likely

as others to have higher total 

shareholder returns than those of 

their peer group
Accenture research shows that companies 



time (ﬁImproversﬂ
4) were four times more 
likely to have total shareholder returns that 

outperform their peers, compared to non-

improvers. On average, Improvers™ total 

shareholders returns outperform industry 

peers
5 by 53 percent, while other companies 
outperform their peers by only 4 percent.
4xCompanies that ha
ve improved their
inclusion of persons with disabilities over

time were 
four times more likely
 than 

others to have total shareholder returns

that outperform those of their peer group
4  
number of points they could gain to reach 100.
5  






8What™s Holding 
Companies Back?
  

disability initiative
s. While many are concerned about the costs of 
accommodating persons with disabilities, these are actually minimal 

and fruitful investments.
According to employers participating in a recent study by Job 
Accommodation Network, a service from the U.S. Department of 



(59 percent) of accommodations cost absolutely nothing to make, 

while the rest typically cost only $500 per employee with a disability.
6 

quantitative business case for robust disability inclusion programs. 

If we make companies aware of the potential gains, share success 

stories and demonstrate how to build these programs, we can quickly 

get more persons with disabilities into the workforce, where they can 

thrive. 
ﬁDeafness is just a way 

of life, a lifestyle. I tell my 

colleagues all the time, 

just because someone 

has a disability, it doesn™t 

prevent them from 

delivering great work.ﬂ 


 6 https://askjan.org/topics/costs.cfm
9ﬁBeing honest about where you 



inclusive company. Accountability 

and creating an environment of trust 

where employees feel comfortable self-

identifying as having a disability are true 

measures of inclusion.ﬂ 
Œ   Chad Jerdee, 


Persons with Disabilities Sponsor, 

Accenture
 10How can companies build an inclusive 

The Four Key Actions

participating companies reveal four key actions for attracting, 

hiring, retaining and advancing diverse talent. 
1Employ
O

disabilities are represented in their workplace. 

Beyond hiring, employers should implement 

practices that encourage and progress 

persons with disabilities.
Recruiting in Fresh Ways
ﬁIn the case of people with autism, 
the knowledge base and technical 

aptitude of individuals can be 


why we weren™t placing them. 



interview process. We changed 

our approach to what the process 

should look like. Now we work with 

a local group to bring candidates in 

for a week-long academy. We offer 

team work and technical exercises, 

and a lot of training. At the end of 

the week, we have an idea of those 

who will receive a job offer.ﬂ 



Microsoft
2EnableLeaders must provide employees with 
disabilities with accessible tools and

technology and/or a formal accommodations 

program. Consider cultivating greater 

awareness through formal training programs 

for those without disabilities to learn about 

the tools and accomodations available for 

better integration across teams. 
Making it Work
ﬁWe have a support services team 

that is made up of 300 people with 
intellectual disabilities. They work 

in four different locations in the 



external client engagement. That 

helps the individual, the community, 

and us. They service all customers Œ 

those with and without disabilities; 

both internal and external.ﬂ
Œ Wil Lewis,
SVP of Diversity and Inclusion, 
Bank of America113EngageTo foster an inclusive culture throughout 

awareness-building through recruitment 

efforts, disability education programs and 

grass-roots-led efforts (for example, an 

employee resource group) and events.
Building the Pipeline

the National Wheelchair Basketball 

Association. Their youth tournaments 

are a blast! But we are there for more 

than the fun. The events allow us to 

talk to youth about what it means to 

work at T-Mobile. These conversations 

are pivotal because many of these 

kids have never considered that they 

have an option for an independent 

life. My favorite part is seeing their self-



that comes from these events.ﬂ
Œ  Bri Sambo, 
 Senior Program Manager, 

4Empower
Companies must offer mentoring and 
coaching initiatives, as well as skilling/re-
skilling programs, to ensure that persons with 

disabilities continue to grow and succeed.  

Persons with disabilities should occupy roles at 

all levels, including top leadership positions.
Getting the Best
ﬁPeople with disabilities tend to 

be some of the most creative, 

innovative and, quite frankly, most 

loyal employees. A person with 

a disability wakes up every day 

thinking about being innovative 

Œ that is a skill set. That ability to 
problem solve is innate to them. 

Our training programs quickly went 

from philanthropy to skill search.ﬂ
Œ David Casey, 


CVS Health
12Beyond Revenue: 

A large body of previous research shows that disability 

six key areas of ﬁinclusion incentives.ﬂ
Incre
ased Innovation
Persons with disabilities have to be creative to adapt to the world 

around them. As such, they develop strengths such as problem-

solving skills, agility, persistence, forethought and a willingness to 


7  
Having employees with disabilities across departments helps ensure 

that the products and services that go to market are truly inclusive. 

And making things more accessible for persons with disabilities can 



for instance, home devices using natural voice recognition, driving 

sales and growth.
8 Improved Shareholder Value
Businesses that hire persons with disabilities and foster inclusive 


9  Regulators and the investor community increasingly monitor company 

culture and diversity. Disability inclusion is a key component of these 

metrics, and mandatory reporting on them will be enforced for some 

federal contractors starting in 2019.
107

https://www.inc.com/sylvia-ann-
hewlett/millennials-with-disabilities-a-large-invisible-talent-cohort-with-innovative-potential.html
.   8
9 
  10  https://www.governmentcontractorcomplianceupdate.com/2018/08/14/breaking-news-ofccp-issues-new-directive-ordering-focused-compliance-
evaluations/
13Improved Productivity

alongside employees with disabilities makes non-disabled individuals more 

aware of how to make the workplace more inclusive and better for everyone. 



community outreach program is in place.
11 
Work environments that are more inclusive of persons with disabilities 







with disabilities is not as expensive or challenging as is often assumed. A 

DuPont employee survey found that when employees with disabilities are 

graded on the same scale as other employees, 90 percent of them receive 

performance ratings of ﬁaverageﬂ or above average.ﬂ
12  Access to the Supplier Ecosystem
Business leaders have discovered that a diverse supply base is a competitive 

advantage.
13 Hackett™s 2016 Supplier Diversity Study, for instance, found that 
companies allocating 20 percent or more of their spend to diverse suppliers 

attributed 10 to 15 percent of their annual sales to supplier diversity 

programs. According to the WeConnect report on global supplier diversity 

and inclusion, the advantages of inclusive sourcing are: 
Ł  Access to new suppliers, innovative solutions and cost savings through 
increased competition;
Ł  Awareness of diverse customer needs, increased market share and 
shareholder value; and
Ł  Brand enhancement and recruitment/retention of employers who want 
meaningful work.


businesses. In addition to the ﬁset-asidesﬂ in federal contracts, disability-

owned businesses are eligible for preferred purchase programs run by 

various state governments.
14 15
  11

12

https://medium.com/nga-economic-opportunity/an-untapped-talent-pool-the-opportunity-in-employing-people-with-disabiltiies-77be9f76339c
 13
https://gbr.pepperdine.edu/2010/08/supplier-diversity-and-competitive-advantage-new-opportunities-in-emerging-domestic-markets/
 14
http://www.askearn.org/wp-content/uploads/docs/stateprocurement.pdf
 15

14Improved Market Share



with disabilities as the third-largest market segment in the U.S., after Hispanics 

and African-Americans. This market expands when family members, caregivers 



disabilities are counted. 
A study by the American Institutes for Research (April 2018) reveals that the 
total after-tax disposable income for working-age persons with disabilities is 

about $490 billion (compared with $582 billion for Hispanics and $501 billion 

for African Americans.) According to the Workplace Initiative 2017 report, 



targeted marketing efforts can expect an increase in patronage from persons 

with disabilities.
Enhanced Reputation
Companies that adopt inclusive marketing and advertising efforts tend to stand 

out from the competition. A survey undertaken by the National Business and 

Disability Council in 2017 found that 66 percent of consumers will purchase 

goods and services from a business that features persons with disabilities in 

their advertising, while 78 percent will purchase goods and services from a 

business that takes steps to ensure easy access for individuals with disabilities 

at their physical locations.
16  A Nielsen study in 2016 found that persons with disabilities tend to be more 

brand loyal and also make more shopping trips and spend more per trip than 

the average consumer.
17 16 A hidden market: The purchasing power of working-age adults with disabilities, American Institutes for Research, April 2018,
17  Reaching Prevalent, Diverse Consumers with Disabilities, Nielsen, 2016, 
http://sites.nielsen.com/newscenter/measuring-impact-consumers-
disabilities/
15The Next Frontier of Corporate 
Social Responsibility

their employees with disabilities has increased 40-fold over the past four 
years. But there is still much work to be done. 
To unleash the trapped value within the persons-with-disabilities community, 


employee engagement and awareness surveys. Then, they should share the 

compelling business case for disability inclusion and implement the holistic 




obligation. They are excitedly embracing the advantages that come with 

employing more creative, industrious and well-rounded people. 
ﬁAs a single mom with 
a physical disability, I 



Now I have a job I love 

and can support my 

family. It has changed 

my life completely.ﬂ 
Œ  Ntombifuthi Dhlamini, employed through 
Leonard Cheshire Disability™s ﬁAccess to 

Livelihoodsﬂ program, supported by Accenture
 16About the Research
This research is based on approximately 140 unique respondents of the Disability 






industries but is limited to the U.S. market. 
We applied econometric models to public and proprietary data to identify: 
1. 
 The link between disability inclusion policies and business performance in terms of 

2. The relationship between disability workforce participation and GDP. 
PERSONS WITH DISABILITIES


a disability as someone who has a physical or mental impairment that substantially 

limits one or more major life activities; has a record of such an impairment; or is 

regarded as having such an impairment. The ADA was amended in 2008 and became 

effective January 1, 2009. The ADAAA requires a broader interpretation of disability by 

schools, testing agencies and employers than the original law. 

https://www.ada.gov
 CHAMPIONS
Accenture Research assessed 140 leading disability-inclusive companies with select 



factors, activities and best practices in 45 of the 140 companies (32 percent). All 



However, the 45 ﬁDisability Inclusion Championsﬂ are those assessed as providing 

leading-edge disability programs and initiatives that can be potentially implemented 

by others. 
IMPROVERS


participating companies. To quantify the effort in improving the disability-related 

policies, we introduce an ﬁimprovement score metricﬂ calculated as the ratio between 

the annual score change and the maximum number of points they could have gained 



percent of our own improvement score metric. 
PEER GROUP
In our TSR models, we compared survey respondents to the top 10 company peers as 





SIC code); (3) Amount of common equity analysts™ coverage; (4) Available information 



17 About Accenture
Accenture is a leading global professional services company, providing 
a broad range of services and solutions in strategy, consulting, digital, 
technology and operations. Combining unmatched experience and 



functions Œ underpinned by the world™s largest delivery network Œ 
Accenture works at the intersection of business and technology to 
help clients improve their performance and create sustainable value 
for their stakeholders. With 459,000 people serving clients in more 

than 120 countries, Accenture drives innovation to improve the way the 

world works and lives. Visit us at 
www.accenture.com
. And for more on 
Accenture and inclusion, visit 
www.accenture.com/pwd
Accenture Research
Accenture Research shapes trends and creates data-driven insights 


power of innovative research techniques with a deep understanding of 

our clients™ industries, our team of 250 researchers and analysts spans 23 

countries and publishes hundreds of reports, articles and points of view 

every year.



guides our innovations and allows us to transform theories and fresh ideas 

into real-world solutions for our clients.

www.accenture.com/research
About Our Partners
 Disability:IN
, formerly known as the US Business Leadership Network, 


worldwide. Partnering with more than 160 corporations, Disability:IN 
expands opportunities for people with disabilities across enterprises. 


change for people with disabilities in business. Through its programs and 

services, Disability:IN empowers businesses to achieve disability inclusion 
and equality, with the goal of advancing inclusion to the point when the 

https://disabilityin.org/

 
The American Association of People with Disabilities (AAPD)
 is a convener, connector and catalyst for change, increasing the political and 
economic power of people with disabilities.
 