March 2018
www.herproject.org
Financial Inclusion 
for Women
Expanding Mobile Financial Servicesin India™s Garment Sector
Research Report
About this Report
This report examines the opportunity to expand ˜nancial inclusion for women in India™s garment sector by increasing 
women™s use of mobile ˜nancial products and services. We believe that by increasing women™s access and their use of 

˜nancial products and services, it will be possible to ful˜ll the promise of ˜nancial inclusion to advance gender equality  

and women™s empowerment, improve livelihoods, and spur economic growth. 
Our research indicates that mobile ˜nancial services provide several bene˜ts that can increase women™s use of formal 
˜nancial services. Some of these bene˜ts are convenience, safety, privacy, and access to more sophisticated services. 

But to realize these opportunities, women need to be connected to these products and services and trained on how to 

use them. Furthermore, companies must develop products and services that suit women™s needs speci˜cally.
There are two main goals of this report: To highlight the barriers and opportunities to increasing ˜nancial inclusion of 
women in India™s garment sector, and to encourage key stakeholders to pursue activities that will increase women™s use  

of mobile ˜nancial services.
To meet these objectives, the report is divided into four main sections:
This report is based on a combination of desk-based literature review, and qualitative research sessions conducted in 
India by members of the HERproject team. The report was written by Chhavi Ghuliani and Lucia Flores Guevara, with 

additional inputs from Filippo Sebastio, Eva Dienel, Kritika Sharma, and Christine Svarer. Any errors remain those of the 

authors. Comments may be directed to Chhavi Ghuliani  at cghuliani@bsr.org.
Expanding Financial Inclusion of Women in India™s Garment Sector.
 This 

section illustrates why India™s garment sector presents a prime opportunity to 

invest in  and test programs that use mobile ˜nancial services and products to 

close the gender gap in ˜nancial inclusion.
INTRODUCTION:
01Insights on Women™s Use of Mobile Financial Services in India™s Garment 

Factories.
 This section provides insights on the drivers of and barriers to 
women™s use of mobile ˜nancial products and services based on BSR™s research 

in the Indian garment sector. It also includes an analysis of India™s mobile ˜nancial 

services market today based on the market™s potential to meet women™s needs. 
02DRIVERS, 

BARRIERS, 
and
 OPPORTUNITIES:
This section outlines recommendations for three major stakeholder groupsŠ

brands and factories; ˜nancial service providers; and donors, NGOs and ˜nancial 

inclusion expertsŠto support women™s increased use of mobile ˜nancial services 

in India™s garment sector. 
03RECOMMENDATIONS:
This section examines the opportunities for BSR™s HERproject to leverage the 

HER˜nance initiative and address the challenges women workers face in actively 

using ˜nancial services. 
04
IMPLICATIONS 
of 
OUR RESEARCH 
for
 HERFINANCE:
Acknowledgments
 BSR would like to thank the following individuals for 
contributing their time, expertise, and resources used in 

this research:
Lynn Eisenhart, Pawan Bakshi, and Daniel Radcliffe of the 
Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation; Joyce Kam and Pamela 

Mar, Li & Fung; Meghna Talwar, Williams-Sonoma Inc.; 

Adrian Sherman and Raja Ganesh, The Children™s Place; 

and Marianna Tsien, ANN Inc.
BSR would also like to thank the various participants of 
the research sessions. Speci˜cally, the women and men 

garment workers who shared their stories with us, and 

the management teams of the garment factories who 

gave us hospitality and honest feedback. The names of 

the individuals who and businesses which participated 

in the research are not being disclosed in this report for 

con˜dentiality reasons.
Disclaimer
BSR publishes occasional papers as contributions to 

the understanding of the role of business in society and 

the trends related to corporate social responsibility and 

responsible business practices. BSR maintains a policy 

of not acting as a representative of its membership, nor 

does it endorse speci˜c policies or standards. The views 

expressed in this publication are those of its authors and 

do not re˚ect those of BSR members.

 Suggested citation
Ghuliani, Chhavi and Lucia Flores Guevara. 2017. 

ﬁFinancial Inclusion for Women: Expanding Mobile 

Financial Services in India™s Garment Sector.ﬂ BSR.
Table of Contents
How India™s Regulations Support Financial Inclusion.......................................................................................7
Why Mobile Matters for Financial Inclusion.........................................................................................................9

The Garment Sector™s Potential to Advance Financial Inclusion...................................................................10
Introduction
6Expanding Financial Inclusion of Women in India™s Garment Sector
Appendix
.........................................................................................................................................................................30
About this Research ...............................................................................................................................................2

Our Findings: The Promise of Mobile and the Barriers to Overcome ..........................................................4

Recommendations to Leverage Mobile Phones to Increase Women™s Financial Inclusion.....................5
Executive Summary
1Drivers Enabling Women™s Use of Mobile Financial Services........................................................................13

Barriers to Women™s Use of Mobile Financial Services...................................................................................15

Mobile Financial Services through a Gender Lens..........................................................................................18
Drivers, Barriers, and Opportunities
Insights on Women™s Use of Mobile Financial Services in India™s Garment Factories
12Recommendations for Mobile Financial Service Providers.............................................................................25

Recommendations for Brands and Factories....................................................................................................26

Recommendations for Donors, NGOs, and Financial Inclusion Experts.....................................................27
Recommendations
23Implications of Research for HER˜nance
28Financial Inclusion for Women
 I Executive Summary I 
1Around the world, there has been great progress when it 
comes to ˜nancial inclusion. Between 2011 and 2014, the 

number of people who own an account at a ˜nancial institution 

grew by 700 million, and the percentage of adults who own 
an account grew to 62 percent from 51 percent.
1 The 2014 
Global Findex database de˜nes account ownership as having 
an account either at a ˜nancial institution or through a mobile 
money provider.
2 An account at a ˜nancial institution can be an 
account at a bank or another type of ˜nancial institution, such 
as a credit union, cooperative, or micro˜nance institution. On 

the other hand, mobile money providers offer accounts that can 

be accessed through a mobile phone and used to save, pay 

bills, or send or receive money. 
Despite these gains, more than 2 billion adults still do not use 
formal ˜nancial services such as deposit and savings accounts, 
payment services, loans, and insurance.
3 The majority of the 
people who don™t have access to formal ˜nancial services live in 
the developing world, and women represent a disproportionate 

percentage of these people. In developing economies, 59 

percent of men reported having an account in 2014, compared 

to only 50 percent of women. The gender gap is largest in 

South Asia, where the difference in account ownerships 
between men and women is 18 percentage points.
4 Recent studies underscore the important role ˜nancial inclusion 
plays in reducing income inequality, improving livelihoods, and 
spurring economic growth.
5  Sustainable Development Goals 
(SDGs) 1 (target 4) and 5 (target 7) explicitly call for equal 
access to ˜nancial services as a building block to end poverty 
and achieve gender equality.
6 For women, ˜nancial inclusion 
can lead to greater ˜nancial independence and control over 
˜nancial resources, giving them more bargaining power at 

home and in˚uence over family decisions. Moreover, because 

women typically invest 90 percent of economic resources into 

health, nutrition, and family education, the ˜nancial inclusion of 
women contributes to long-term prosperity for communities.
7  Unfortunately, while more women are gaining access to formal 
˜nancial servicesŠin the form of account ownershipŠthese 

same women are not using these services as much as they 

could be. In India, 58 percent of women owned at least one 

bank account as of 2015, but only 35 percent of these women 
were using that account, compared to 49 percent of men.
8 In order for ˜nancial inclusion to achieve its promise, women 
need more than just access to ˜nancial products and services, 

they need to use these services actively and have a say in the 

decision-making process when it comes to ˜nancial decisions 

in the household overall.
Executive Summary
The 
gender gap
in account ownership
was 
18%
 points in
South AsiaŠ
the largest
in the world.
2014
2011-2014
2015
The number of people
who owned an account at a
˜nancial institution 
grew by 
700 million 
globally
.In India, 
58% of women 
owned at least one bank 
account, but
 only
35% of these women
were using that account.
Financial Inclusion for Women
 I Executive Summary I 
2For 10 years, BSR™s HERproject has led programs aimed at unlocking the full potential of women working in global supply 
chains through workplace programs promoting health, ˜nancial inclusion, and gender equality. 
Recently, our HER˜nance initiativeŠa program dedicated to understanding and closing the gender gap in ˜nancial 
inclusionŠpartnered with the Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation on research to explore one question: What strategies and 

programs will be most effective in increasing women™s use of formal ˜nancial services?
To answer this question, we examined the opportunity to increase women™s use of formal ˜nancial services in India™s 
garment sector. We focused on India and its garment sector for three key reasons:
ABOUT THIS RESEARCH
123India has the world™s largest 

number of ˜nancially excluded 

women.
 Roughly 280 million 
women in India don™t have 

access to formal ˜nancial 

services, which means that one 

out of four ˜nancially excluded 

women across the world is 
Indian.
9 While 60 percent of 
Indian women have at least one 
bank account, only 40 percent 

of women actively use a ˜nancial 
services account of any kind.
10
India has created policies to 
support ˜nancial inclusion.
 India™s government and central 

bank have made ˜nancial 

inclusion a national priority, 

and the country™s new policies 

and programs increased bank 

account ownership by 11 percent 
between 2014 and 2015.
11India™s garment sector presents 
an opportunity to reach a 

large number of low-income 

women.
 The garment and 
textiles industry is India™s second-

largest employer, and women 

comprise the majority of the 

workforce in this sector. Based 

on our research, most of the 

women formally employed are 

paid electronically into their bank 

accounts, but they nonetheless 

withdraw salaries on payday and 

revert to making most ˜nancial 

transactions in cash.
The fact that these female garment workers still use 
cash for ˜nancial transactions illustrates one of the main 

challenges in achieving true ˜nancial inclusion: While most 

of them now have access to bank accounts, their actual 

use of ˜nancial services remains low. To ful˜ll the promise 

of ˜nancial inclusion in India, women must not only 

have access, they must use the wide range of ˜nancial 

products and services that are available to them.
There are two main objectives of this report: to highlight 

the barriers and opportunities to increasing ˜nancial 

inclusion of women in India™s garment sector, and to 

encourage key stakeholders to pursue activities that will 

increase the use of mobile ˜nancial services among these 

women. We are planning further research to test the 

˜ndings of this scoping study, and we welcome feedback 

from the wider community focused on closing the gender 

gap in ˜nancial inclusion.
Financial Inclusion for Women
 I Executive Summary I 
4For our research, we conducted qualitative interviews and focus 
group discussions with garment workers and factory managers, 

merchants, ˜nancial services providers, and other experts. 

We also engaged in a literature review of industry trends and 

government policies.
While the scope of our research was narrow, we believe mobile 
holds promise in closing the ˜nancial inclusion gender gap.

In India™s garment sector, there is unique potential to increase

women workers™ use of ˜nancial services by providing 

awareness and education programs about these services,    

and creating products tailored to meet their needs.
 Mobile ˜nancial services are provided by banks or other ˜nancial 
institutions that allow customers to conduct ˜nancial transactions 

remotely using a˛mobile device such as a cellular phone, 

smartphone, or a tablet.
For female garment workers, mobile ˜nancial services offer a safe 
and convenient alternative to traditional banks. Mobile also opens 

the door for women to try more sophisticated services such as 

insurance and credit.
Our research indicated that several trends are creating an 
enabling environment for women™s use of mobile ˜nancial services 

in India™s garment sector. Some of these trends include near-

universal access to formal bank accounts and mobile phones, and 

the rise of India™s new Payments Banks, which are newly created 

˜nancial institutions that are targeted at India™s underbanked 

population. Payments Banks rely on mobile channels and on a 

network of agents and ATMs to accept deposits; offer remittance 

services, mobile payments and purchases, debit cards; and other 

basic banking services.˛Despite this environment, usage of mobile 

˜nancial services among women remains low because barriers 

exist due to a range of cultural, social, and market barriers. 

Among these barriers are gender norms that result in women 

being less likely to use smartphones than men, and more likely to 

lack awareness of mobile ˜nancial services. Women also are less 

likely to have access to education than men, which makes it more 

dif˜cult for them to engage with and adopt new technologies as 

quickly. Additionally, many women and men shared with us that it 

is considered a man™s responsibility to manage ˜nances. 
We also learned that India™s current mobile productsŠand the 
ecosystem supporting mobile in generalŠare not meeting the 

speci˜c needs of female garment workers fully. Most women 

still make payments in cash because so few schools, utility 

companies, and other merchants they use regularly offer 

digital payment options. In addition, many women are not yet 

comfortable using these products and services, and require 

support from mobile ˜nancial services providers to help them 

open accounts, make deposits, send remittances, and withdraw 

cash. Women might be more inclined to use these products if 

providers introduced options that met their needs more effectively 

and were easier to use.
OUR FINDINGS:
The promise of mobile and the barriers to overcome
Financial Inclusion for Women
 I Executive Summary I 
5123Financial services offered through mobile channels, such as basic phones and smartphones, hold promise to 
increase women™s use of ˜nancial services by offering accessibility, security, and convenience. To realize the full 

potential of this niche, providers must develop relevant products that meet women™s needs, and women have 

to be introduced to such products and services and trained on how to use them. 
This report outlines actions that three different stakeholder groups can pursue to support the uptake of mobile 
˜nancial services among women workers in India™s garment sector:
RECOMMENDATIONS:
To leverage mobile phones to increase women™s 
˜nancial inclusion
Donors, experts, and NGOs 

should work together to 

leverage their knowledge 

of the needs of women, 

intra-household patterns, 

barriers, and opportunities. 

Collaboration also can 

help devising solutions to 

overcome non-˜nancial 

barriers such as social 

norms. In addition, these 

groups can commission 

in-depth research focused 

on the ˜nancial inclusion 

of garment workers, and 

women speci˜cally, both 

to prove our conclusions 

in this report, and to 

develop robust evidence 

for strategies and programs 

that can be implemented 

by the government, the 

private sector, and other 

stakeholders on a large 

scale.
As employers of a signi˜cant 

number of women, apparel 

brands and factories can 

offer an access point to 

connect low-income women 

to mobile ˜nancial products 

and services. They also 

can provide the space for 

training women. 
Financial services providers 

can work on merchant 

acquisition to digitize the 

payment streams women 

use, develop products that 

meet women™s speci˜c 

needs, and provide them 

with necessary training to 

feel comfortable with and 

use mobile ˜nancial services.
Financial Services Providers
Apparel Brands and Factories
Donors, Experts, and NGOs
In India, 
only six in 10
 women have a savings account in their own 
names. That means there are an estimated 
280 million unbanked
 
women. Some might say this makes India the world™s capital when it 

comes to ˜nancially excluded women.
12 
Despite these ˜gures, India™s recent changes in regulations and 

policy are addressing many of the barriers low-income women face in 

accessing and using mobile ˜nancial services. These changes also are 

supporting a move to mobile ˜nancial services, which has the potential 

to increase women™s use of ˜nancial products because mobile offers 

more convenience, safety, and privacy, and it can open the door for 

women to access more sophisticated products and services.
 INTRODUCTION :
Expanding Financial 
Inclusion of Women in 

India™s Garment Sector
Financial Inclusion for Women
 I Introduction I 
7In recent years, India™s government and its central bank have made ˜nancial inclusion a national priority 
and have implemented a number of policy and regulatory changes to support universal ˜nancial inclusion. 

Changes span a gamut of issues:
HOW INDIA™S REGULATIONS SUPPORT 

FINANCIAL INCLUSION
Basic Savings Accounts.
 With an aim to provide a bank account to every 

household, India™s national ˜nancial inclusion strategy, Pradhan Mantri Jan-Dhan 

Yojana (PMJDY), has reduced documentation requirements for people to access 

basic banking services such as credit, insurance, and pension facilities. This 

change also enabled people to receive government bene˜ts directly into their 

accounts. Since the 2014 launch, about 290 million˛accounts have been opened 
under the PMJDY program,
13 covering more than˛99 percent of households.
14 Biometric Identi˜cation.
 Without formal ID, many Indians struggled to open a bank 
account. In response, the government launched Aadhaar, the national biometric 
identi˜cation system that provides every Indian citizen with a unique identi˜cation 

number linked to their ˜ngerprints and retinal scan. Aadhar has the potential to 

accelerate the ˜nancial inclusion of low income populations with no formal ID since 

it can be used instead of paper documentation.
Payments Banks.
 In 2015, the Reserve Bank of India approved the creation of 
Payments Banks, which are branchless institutions that provide basic banking 
services
15 through a combination of digital channels and a network of agents 
that extend bank services to communities and homes. These banks are primarily 
intended to reach low-income and underserved customers. 
The ﬁLess Cashﬂ Economy.
 In 2016, India™s prime minister announced the 
demonetization of 86 percent of the cash in circulation.
16 That same year, employers 
were allowed to pay workers digitally without asking for prior written authorization. 
As a result, cash has been nearly eliminated from factory payrolls and workers are

now paid directly in a bank account. This is helping accelerate the uptake of mobile 

˜nancial services in one of the world™s most cash-reliant economies. 
``Financial Inclusion for Women
 I Introduction I 
8The effect of these changes has been mixed. On one hand, bank account 
ownership increased to 63 percent from 52 percent of all adults between 

2014 and 2015, and the proportion of Indian women with individual accounts 

in formal ˜nancial institutions reached 61 percent in 2015, an increase from 
48 percent in 2014.
17 Unfortunately, there is a gender gap in account usage 
as Indian women still lag behind by eight percentage points in account 
ownership, and fewer than four out of 10 Indian women actively use their 
bank accounts.
18 Adding insult to injury, just a year after demonetization, 99 
percent of the banned high value notes were returned to the banking system, 

and cash use rose to the levels they were at before demonetization.
19These outcomes could be attributed to the fact that government initiatives 
to encourage cashless payments did not incorporate ˜nancial education, 

the targets for opening bank accounts were set for households instead of 
individual accounts for women, and that current policies are gender-neutral.
20 Coupled to that, Indian adults lack awareness of mobile money, have low 
SIM-card ownership, and don™t have strong incentives to use cashless modes 
of payments since most merchants don™t accept them.
21 To achieve true 
˜nancial inclusion of women, efforts must move beyond access-oriented 
measures to focus on actual usage of ˜nancial products and services by the 

underbanked women to whom they are supposed to cater. Our research 

indicates that a combination of awareness and training, efforts to increase 

merchant acceptance, and the introduction of new products that meet 

women worker™s needs better meet advance women™s use of mobile ˜nancial 

products as well. 
Financial Inclusion for Women
 I Introduction I 
9While digital ˜nancial services can be offered in many formsŠincluding ATMs, point-of-sale terminals, and debit cardsŠ
mobile ˜nancial services, the ˜nancial services offered through a mobile phone, deliver several bene˜ts that could make 

adoption more widespread among female garment workers in India: 
WHY MOBILE MATTERS FOR FINANCIAL INCLUSION
Convenience.
Mobile ˜nancial services eliminate the challenges 
women face in ˜nding time and transportation to 

access traditional brick-and-mortar banks.
Safety.
Using mobile at home can remove the need for women 
to travel to and from the bank. Using mobile also 

reduces the risks women face in traveling with cash.
Privacy.
Mobile transfers can allow for greater privacy and control 
than cash. This additional control could help women 

gain more decision-making power in the household.
Access.
Access to more sophisticated services. Mobile ˜nancial 
products such as mobile payments can make banking 

easier because of their greater accessibility, mobile 

payments present greater scaling potential among 
low-income population than traditional banking.
22 As these women become more comfortable using 
mobile payments, they may be more likely to try more 

sophisticated ˜nancial products and services such as 

insurance and credit.
With 616 million unique mobile subscribers, India is the 
second-largest mobile market in the world.
23
 The overall 
penetration rate of mobile phones in India for unique 
subscribers is expected to grow to 68 percent by 2020 
from around 50 percent today.
24 It is worth noting this 
data encompasses both women and men, and that 
the numbers are not restricted to the number of people 

who own a mobile phone, but rather to the number of 

people who are subscribed to a mobile service.  However 

you look at the data, phone ownership and use have 

increased dramatically in the past two years: In 2015,  
184 million Indians had a feature phone;
25 today, around 
500 million have one.
26India is also the world™s fastest-growing smartphone 
market: In 2016, 275 million Indians had a smartphone, 

and that number is expected to grow to 688 million by 
2020.
27 Mobile has become the dominant platform for 
internet access in India, and 4G is forecast to grow to 
280 million by 2020 from a connection base of 3 million 

at the end of 2015. 
For all these reasons, we can expect ˜nancial services 

offered through mobile channels to become increasingly 

popular among women. However, in India the gender 

gap in mobile phone ownership is 36 percent, which 

translates into around 114 million fewer women than 
men who own mobile phones.
28  Therefore, to realize 
the potential of mobile ˜nancial services, women need 
to be trained on how to use them, and products and 

services must be tailored to meet their needs. There™s 

also a need for the ˜nancial inclusion community and 

government initiatives to focus more on getting women 

to use their accounts. For example, a signi˜cant number 

of the accounts opened under the PMJDY program 
remain dormant.
29 We believe investments to build out 
the mobile ecosystem, by allowing women to use mobile 
˜nancial services in their communities, will enable greater 

use of accounts and will help women ﬁgraduateﬂ to more 

advanced ˜nancial services. 
Financial Inclusion for Women
 I Introduction I 
10Given the importance of the garment sector to the Indian 
economy and considering it employs mostly women and 

pays them through deposits into formal bank accounts, 

India™s garment sector has a prime opportunity to expand 

the use of ˜nancial services among millions of women 

workers.
After agriculture, the garment and textiles industry is 
India™s second-largest employer, directly employing more 
than 48 million women and men,
30
 and contributing 
to about 19 percent of the industrial workforce and 

5.2 percent of India™s GDP.
31 Within that industry, the 
readymade garment sector employs 12 million workers,
32 
mainly in urban and semi-urban clusters where workers 

are mostly in the 20Œ40 age group.
33 It also offers more 
THE GARMENT SECTOR™S POTENTIAL TO ADVANCE 
FINANCIAL INCLUSION
formal employment opportunities. The largest garment 

manufacturing centers are in Bengaluru (Karnataka), 

Tirupur and Chennai (Tamil Nadu), and the National 

Capital Region (NCR).
Nationwide, female participation in the garment and 
textiles industry is approximately 60 percent,
34 excluding 
home workers employed on embellishment, embroidery, 
and other skilled jobs. In the north, the industry employs 

mostly men, whereas the southern hubs of Karnataka 

and Tamil Nadu employ a majority of women. For many 

of these women, garment factory work is a unique 

opportunity to earn formal, salaried wages and contribute 
to the ˜nancial well-being of their households.
35We are focusing on the Indian garment sector to expand the use of mobile ˜nancial services among millions of women 
workers for the following reasons: 

  »The garment sector allows us to reach a large number of low-income women:
 Women comprise the majority 
of the workforce in this industry. Many garment factories are located in a small geographic areas and women 

convene in these workplaces for eight to 10 hours a day every week. This level of aggregation offers the potential 

to promote the ˜nancial inclusion of a large number of women in a cost-effective way.
 »Women formally employed in the Indian garment sector already have access to ˜nancial services and 

products but usage of such products remains low:
 Despite the fact that women garment workers are being 

paid through digital deposits into bank accounts, they continue to conduct mostly informal transactions and 

are not bene˜ting from the ˜nancial products available to them fully. The garment industry is a good platform 

to design and pilot products that can appeal to low income women employed in other industries and, more 

generally, to women with a similar household income.
 »BSR has deep expertise implementing HERproject in the garment sector:
 For the last 10 years BSR™s 

HERproject has worked with more than 50 international companies and 600 suppliers to reach more than 

700,000 women. Most of this work has been in the garment industry, and our deep knowledge and expertise 

in this sector enables 
us to collaborate with service providers to ensure they meet the unmet needs of women 
workers.
For all these reasons, India™s garment sector has a prime opportunity to expand the use of mobile ˜nancial services 

among millions of women workers.
Financial Inclusion for Women
 I Introduction I 
11An initiative of the BSR HERproject, HER˜nance aims to leverage workplace programs promoting 
˜nancial inclusion to unlock the full potential of women working in global supply chains around the 

world. The goals of HER˜nance are: (1) To ensure the poorŠparticularly womenŠhave the proper 

knowledge of, skills for, and attitudes about ˜nancial services; and (2) to provide access to useful 

and affordable ˜nancial products and services to enable these women to participate in the formal 

˜nancial sector.
In 2015, HER˜nance partnered with the Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation to deepen the ˜nancial 
inclusion of women in readymade garment factories in India and Bangladesh. We chose these 

countries because HER˜nance has a well-established brand network in India and Bangladesh. There 
also is a signi˜cant gender gap in ˜nancial inclusion in South Asia,
36 giving us another opportunity to 
analyze the challenges and identify possible solutions there.
In Bangladesh, we are working directly with garment factories to support their transition from cash to 
digital payrolls, allowing workers to receive their wages instantly and transparently into formal bank 

accounts
 . In India our research took a different focus because garment workers already receive their 
wages through a digital system. There, we focused on understanding the main barriers to active use 

of ˜nancial services among women workers, and how mobile ˜nancial services can help address 

these challenges and encourage more advanced use of ˜nancial services among women over time.
Our research in India also is helping us re˜ne the HER˜nance program, and we are sharing it more 
broadly through this paper because we believe our ˜ndings will be insightful for ˜nancial service 

providers, factories and brands, donors, NGOs, and technical experts working to close the ˜nancial 

inclusion gender gap. 
This report reveals our ˜ndings to date, including the barriers and opportunities to increase the use 
of mobile ˜nancial services among female garment workers, and how key stakeholders can support 

women™s use of mobile and thus advance ˜nancial inclusion among women in India™s garment sector.
ABOUT THE BSR HERFINANCE PROGRAM AND THIS RESEARCH
Through our research, we learned that increasing access to formal 
bank accounts and ownership of mobile phones, as well as the 

rise of Payments Banks, can drive women™s use of mobile ˜nancial 

services in India™s garment factories. At the same time, barriers exist: 

Smartphone ownership among women is low, many women lack 

awareness of mobile ˜nancial services, and other factors such as low 

literacy levels and social and gender norms are preventing women 

from using these services.
In this section, we look at the drivers and barriers to women™s use 
of mobile ˜nancial products and services, and the supply of the 

products and services in India™s market today. We also analyze the 

potential of these products and services in meeting women™s needs.
DRIVERS, BARRIERS, AND OPPORTUNITIES:
Insights on Women™s Use 
of Mobile Financial Services 

in India™s Garment Factories
Financial Inclusion for Women
 I Drivers, Barriers, and Opportunities I 
13Among the women we interviewed, use of mobile ˜nancial services was low when compared with male 
workers™. We asked women respondents how mobile ˜nancial services could help them overcome some of 

the challenges they experience using traditional ˜nancial services. Based on our research, we believe that 

by understanding these opportunities and advancing their potential, mobile ˜nancial services providers can 

develop products that cater to the needs of women workers. In this section, we outline some of the factors 

that could drive women worker™s use of mobile ˜nancial services.
DRIVERS TO INCREASE WOMEN™S USE OF 

MOBILE FINANCIAL SERVICES
Time savings and convenience. 
Using cash can be 

inconvenient and time-consuming. In addition to working 

six days a week in factories, women shoulder most of 

the responsibility for unpaid work with family and at 
home.
37 
The women we interviewed reported waiting in 
long lines to withdraw money from ATMs and pay bills, 
and they expressed frustration with bank branches being 

closed on SundaysŠtheir only day off. Given the banks™ 

limited opening hours, many women said they were 

forced to take unpaid leave to visit their bank branches 

to make certain transactions.
As an alternative, many women told us they give their 
personal identi˜cation codes to male family members 

to withdraw money for them. This practice leaves the 

women with less control over their ˜nances. It also 

presents privacy issues.
The bottom line: Between work and family obligations, 
women have very little free time. Some refer to 

this phenomenon as ﬁtime poverty,ﬂ and it is a real 

problem for women in India. Jyoti, a female garment 

worker in northern India, told us she is so busy with 

her responsibilities that she has her son or husband 

withdraw money from the ATM on her behalf. ﬁI do not 

have time,ﬂ she said. ﬁSometimes there is no money [in 

the ATM], or, if there is money, there is a long queue in 

front. After going home, I need to cook food and help my 

kids [with the homework].ﬂ
Mobile ˜nancial services could reduce the challenge of 
time poverty by giving women the freedom to conduct 

˜nancial transactions when and where it is convenient 

for them. Ranjni, a female garment worker in Tirupur, told 

us that using her banking app to transfer funds takes 

just 10 minutesŠcompared to the six hours it used to 

take her to go to the bank.
ﬁI do not 
have time,
 sometimes there is 
no money [in the 

ATM], or, if there 

is money, there is 

a long queue in 

front. After going 

home, I need to 

cook food and help 

my kids [with the 

homework].ﬂ
Jyoti,
A female garment worker
from northern India
Mobility.
 In India, women face mobility constraints because of their gender. Norms dictate that often women 
need to be accompanied by a man to go to a bank, or that it is not acceptable for women to travel alone to 
visit a male agent.
38 One woman we interviewed said that it was not safe for women to travel alone, while other 
women said the male heads of their households wouldn™t allow them to do so. This hinders access to banking 
and mobile ˜nancial services can solve the mobility barrier by allowing women to conduct transactions from 
their homes.
39Financial Inclusion for Women
 I Drivers, Barriers, and Opportunities I 
14Safety.
 Workers often ˜nd themselves carrying large 
sums of cash to make payments or to save at home. This 
leaves women particularly exposed to the risk of theft or 

loss, and many women mentioned they felt uncomfortable 

carrying money while traveling alone. Raddha, a female 

garment worker from Bengaluru, told us: ﬁIt™s painful [to 

pay school fees]. I have to take leave from work and I am 

worried about carrying cash with me to the school. How 

can I carry so much cash and take a bus to the school?ﬂ 

Mobile ˜nancial services can limit this risk by allowing 

women to conduct cashless transactions to pay for 

services and utilities from their phones.
ﬁIt™s painful
           
[to pay school fees].        

I have to take leave 

from work and I am 

worried about carrying 

cash with me to the 

school. How can I carry 

so much cash and take 

a bus to the school?ﬂ
Tendency to save.
 Women respondents told us that when 

they received cash wages, they were more likely to spend 

their money and less likely to save. While direct deposit of 
wages does increase a women™s tendency to save,
40
 this 
could be further enhanced by enabling women to conduct 
cashless transactions. This could encourage them to keep 

larger portions of their salaries in their accounts instead of 

cashing out everything on payday. Mobile ˜nancial services 

providers could achieve this by acquiring more local 

merchants to accept cashless payments and by promoting 

mobile accounts that offer interest rates on savings that 

match or exceed what is offered by traditional banks.
Cost savings.
 Many garment workers remit money 
to family members through agents who charge 

commissions. These fees could be avoided if workers 

have mobile money accounts and the capability and 

knowledge to use those accounts to conduct ˜nancial 

transactions on their own. Banupriya, a garment worker 

from Perundurai, said the prospect of saving money by 

not paying an agent fee is an incentive for her to learn how 

to use mobile payments and to adopt this technology. ﬁI 

feel that I could learn it,ﬂ Banupriya told us.
High rates of access to mobile phone.
 Perhaps one of 
the most signi˜cant factors to support women™s use of 

mobile ˜nancial services is the fact that nearly all Indian 

adults have access to a mobile phone, either because 

they own one or because they borrow one from family 
and friends.
41 Among the workers who participated in our 
research, basic phone ownership was universal. While 
smartphone ownership was limited, they are becoming 

increasingly accessible to individuals on a garment 
worker™s salary.
 In fact, in some mobile phone shops 
we visited, even in less densely populated areas, it was 
dif˜cult to ˜nd basic phones and the merchants explained 

that this was because the price difference between basic 

phones and smartphones was decreasing dramatically.
Radha H P,
 Garment Worker, Bengaluru.
Financial Inclusion for Women
 I Drivers, Barriers, and Opportunities I 
15members who would then conduct ˜nancial transactions. 
In this scenario, the male heads of households take the 

women™s incomes and give them discretionary allowances 

for food, clothing, and school fees. Rakesh Kumari, a 

garment worker in Delhi, said: ﬁMy husband manages 

everything. I manage the household. I cook food and 

teach my son. I pay other bills, clear rents.ﬂ
Despite earning their own incomes, Indian women still 
are less likely than men to make decisions on how those 
incomes are allocated.
45 These bargaining inequalities 
are underpinned by deeply rooted norms about gender 

roles and responsibilities.
46 Relying on men can further 
reinforce these gender inequalities, giving women less 
autonomy over ˜nancial and household decision-making 

and limiting their ability to save. This practice also raises 

privacy issues in cases where women do not want to 

disclose their salaries and savings balances. It also makes 

it more dif˜cult for women to learn about new ˜nancial 

technologies.
Despite these enablers, there still are many barriers to women™s use of mobile ˜nancial services, including gender norms, 

low levels of digital literacy, lack of awareness of these products and their bene˜ts, and distrust of mobile ˜nancial 

services. Another obstacle: The limitations of some mobile ˜nancial products, including the facts that some don™t offer an 

interface for basic or feature phone, and that some apps are not available in local languages. Finally, the small number of 

merchants that accept digital payments limits the incentives for workers to adopt these technologies. Here™s a closer look 

at some of the greatest barriers:
BARRIERS TO WOMEN™S USE OF MOBILE 

FINANCIAL SERVICES
Gender norms limit women™s use of mobile technology. 

Usage of mobile phones was very basic among women 

who participated in our study: Even those who had a 

smartphone barely used it for things other than to make 

calls. This could be explained by the same norms that 
account for the gender gap in literacy
42 and education 
levels in India.
43 Further research is needed to understand 
how gender norms overlap with the ability of women to 

use these technologies.
44Gender norms that affect the intra-household 
processes and bargaining.
 Most women we interviewed 
followed traditional Indian gender roles that posit women 

administering the money (running errands and paying 

bills) and men deciding how to spend it. Many women 

interviewed, especially married women, told us they 

tended to give their personal identi˜cation numbers 

and ATM cards to their husbands or other male family 
ﬁMy husband 
manages 

everything.
 I manage the household. 
I cook food and teach 

my son. I pay other 

bills, clear rents.ﬂ
Rakesh Kumari,
 Garment Worker, New Delhi.
Financial Inclusion for Women
 I Drivers, Barriers, and Opportunities I 
16Lack of awareness and exposure lead many workers to be 
afraid to conduct mobile transactions because they had 

heard stories about unsuccessful transactions, missing 

balances, and technical glitches. Vellangiri, a married 

male garment worker in Tirupur said, ﬁA small mistake can 

cause my money to be dropped into wrong accounts.ﬂ 

This challenge speaks to the fact that mobile ˜nancial 

services have not yet gained the credibility that traditional 

banks have among the workers. ﬁ[Mobile wallets] are not 

a bank,ﬂ said Azad, a single male garment worker from 

Delhi/NCR who limits use of his mobile wallet to bus, 

auto, and grocery expenses. ﬁBanks are an old traditional 

institution, which our ancestors have been using for ages. 

We cannot keep both in the same bracket.ﬂ
Phone costs and features put services out of reach.
   
While smartphones increasingly are within reach on a 

garment worker™s salary, women workers perceived 

smartphones as being expensive. In addition, women 

workers said they were concerned about the high costs 

associated with using the phones. In India, 3G services 

are expensive, and service providers focus mostly on 

urban areas to maximize pro˜t potential, which explains 

why workers in South India were less exposed to mobile 

˜nancial services than people in Delhi/NCR.
47 High costs 
also are a barrier because many providers offer services 

that require good network quality and coverageŠneither 

of which is available in all parts of India.
Most women working in garment factories struggle with 
reading and writing and have poor knowledge of English. 

Existing mobile money apps are not always available 

in local languages. These apps are targeted to the 

middle class and therefore not designed for users with 

low literacy levels. Also, many mobile ˜nancial services 

platforms are not available in basic or feature phones, 

which bars women who don™t have smartphones from 

using them.
Workers lack awareness of mobile ˜nancial services 
and they are afraid of using them.
 Workers in North 

India, particularly in the Delhi/NCR area, have a more 

sophisticated understanding of mobile ˜nancial services, 

regularly transferring funds from their bank to mobile 

wallet apps. In South India, however, none of the workers 

we interviewed reported making mobile payments. Use 

of mobile ˜nancial services in the south was limited to 

checking balances on banks™ mobile apps.
In Bengaluru and Tamil Nadu, where most of the 
workforce is female, very few workers had heard of apps 

such as the Paytm walletŠthe largest mobile payments 
platform in India (280 million users
48 
). In comparison, 
Paytm had nearly universal name recognition among both 
male and female garment workers in North India. (Until 

recently, Paytm has been targeting the densely populated 

area of Delhi/NCR).
ﬁA small 
mistake can 

cause my 

money to 

be dropped 

into wrong 

accounts.ﬂ
Vellangiri,
A male married garment worker
Tirupur.
Financial Inclusion for Women
 I Drivers, Barriers, and Opportunities I 
17Most merchants still don™t accept digital payments.
 Merchants for large expenses such as rent, school 

fees, utilities, and groceries still don™t accept mobile 

payments. In addition, migrant workers interviewed said 

sending remittances to their home villages also would 

be problematic, since the relatives receiving the money 

don™t understand mobile payments. For these reasons, 

workers saw limited value in using mobile ˜nancial 

services for payments and remittances. However, a few 
Azad Kumar,
 Garment Worker, New Delhi.
ﬁ[Mobile wallets] 

are not a bank
. Banks are an old traditional 

institution, which our 

ancestors have been using 

for ages. We cannot keep 

both in the same bracket.ﬂ
workers were starting to purchase movie and train tickets 

digitally and were receiving discounts for doing so. While 

the ability to purchase goods and services digitally can 

drive usage, the real value of mobile payments won™t be 

signi˜cant enough to encourage wider adoption among 

women workers until the larger transactions they make are 

digitized.
Financial Inclusion for Women
 I Drivers, Barriers, and Opportunities I 
18Despite current barriers to women™s use of mobile ˜nancial services, we believe these offerings provide more advantages 
to women than traditional banks do. Currently, low-income women in India are underserved by traditional banks, which 
˜nd it too expensive to acquire customers whose transactions and deposits are so small.
49  
This environment gives new 
players in the mobile ˜nancial services market the potential to reach a large population of low-income customers if they 
can create innovative products that are accessible, affordable, and cater to women™s speci˜c needs.
In this section, we look at the mobile and digital ˜nancial services offered through India™s newly created Payments Banks, 
with an emphasis on what has the potential to work among women workers and what does not.
MOBILE FINANCIAL SERVICES THROUGH 

A GENDER LENS
SALARYCREDITEDAccountBalanceBillPaymentTransferFundsXEFFICIENCY
SECURITY
ACCESS
INCLUSIVENESS
Requires travel to ATM or bank branch
Receive wages instantly and securely
Cash out at ATMs or wide network
of agents even in rural areas
Ability to conduct self-service 
transactions
Safer, cheaper, faster to remit money
Families in villages lack
access to banking
???X1000X00110ATMOUT OF ORDERTRADITIONAL BANKING
MOBILE BANKING
Long queues at ATMs and network 
failures cause delays in cash out
Still requires handling cash
SENDFinancial Inclusion for Women
 I Drivers, Barriers, and Opportunities I 
19In addition to being inclusive and accessible, Payments 
Banks make banking more ef˜cient and safer for women 

workers. As described earlier in the report, time poverty 

is one of the main challenges identi˜ed by the women we 

interviewed. By using mobile options, women can save 

valuable time since they don™t need to wait in line to make 

or collect payments. These options also allow women to 

conduct transactions without cash, which can reduce the 

risk of theft or of con˜scation of funds by their husbands. 

And because Payments Banks only offer simple products 

that adhere to consumer protection requirements, they are 

easier and safer to use, even for women with limited or no 

˜nancial knowledge.
Overview of products offered by Payments Banks
  
The Reserve Bank of India allows mobile network 
operators and other associated companies to create 

Payments Banks to offer simple products with limited risk 

aimed for those with less or no prior exposure to ˜nancial 

services. Payments Banks are allowed to offer the 

following products (accessible from a mobile phone): 
 »Mobile payments (including remittances, bill 

payments, and payments to merchants)
 »Current account with no minimum balance
 »Savings account with a balance of up to INR 100,000 

(around US$1,500) generating interest
While Payments Banks can offer debit cards, they are 

barred from offering credit directly. However, they can 

cross-sell credit products such as loans, insurance, and 

investment products on behalf of traditional banks and 

insurance companies. In this next section, we examine 

how the products offered by Payments Banks can be 

adapted to the needs of low-income women.
Mobile payments

While digital payments can be made in many formsŠ
including ATMs, point-of-sale terminals, and debit card 

readersŠdigital payments that operate over a mobile 

network offer the greatest potential to resolve the access 

and use challenges women face, including time savings, 

˚exibility, safety, and convenience. Most Payments 

Banks offer a mobile wallet or mobile debit and checking 

accounts that women can use to make payments or to 

cash out.  
Overview of Payments Banks 
Payments BanksŠsmaller-scale banks that offer basic 
banking servicesŠaccount for four speci˜c needs of low-

income women in India: access, security, ef˜ciency, and 

inclusiveness. By targeting a population of women that still 

conducts almost all transactions in cash, and by making 

services available through mobile, ATMs, branches, and 

nearby agents, Payments Banks are making ˜nancial 

services more inclusive and more accessible for women.

In India, there are 18 ATMs and 13.4 bank branches for 

every 100,000 adultsŠfar behind the global average of 43 
ATMs per 100,000 adults.
50 No matter how you look at this 
data, it presents a challenge of access. Payments Banks 
are addressing this challenge by making basic banking 

products available through a network of ﬁbusiness 

correspondents,ﬂ or agents based in underserved 

communities. This model allows retail outlets, fuel stations, 

and post of˜ces to double as a mini bank branches that 

are likely to be located closer to worker™s homes and 

workplaces than regular banks. Moreover, most of these 

business correspondents operate well beyond normal 

banking hours, which is particularly useful for women 

workers who complained of the limited opening hours 

of traditional bank branches. Business correspondents 

help customersŠparticularly ˜rst-time users who might 

be less comfortable with the productsŠopen accounts, 

make deposits, send remittances, and withdraw cash. 

Also, Payments Banks are developing networks of 

merchants that have speci˜c contracts with companies˛to 

accept these payment instruments. Customers can make 

cashless payments at these identi˜ed merchants at no 

charge by using mobile phones or debit cards provided by 

the banks. Paytm, India™s current market leader in digital 

payments, has around 5 million merchants accepting 

cashless payments.
Payments Banks have lowered the ﬁKnow Your Customerﬂ 
requirements, which helps low-income women who lack 

proper documentation. These companies are also creating 

products that are easier for new users to understand 

and that don™t necessarily require a smartphone. Paytm 

Founder Vijay Shekhar Sharma said his company sees 

the low-income population as a market opportunity. His 

company has created a new business model that keeps 

the operating costs low by using ﬁthe power of technology 

and innovation at scaleﬂ with the goal of bringing ˜nancial 

services to the ﬁhundreds of millions of un-served or 
underserved Indians.ﬂ
51Financial Inclusion for Women
 I Drivers, Barriers, and Opportunities I 
20Mobile payments have the potential to improve the livelihoods 
of women workers. Women can use mobile payments to pay 

bills, send remittances, receive government bene˜ts, or recharge 

their phonesŠall without leaving their homes. They also have 

the potential to achieve greater agency by learning to conduct 

transactions from their phones instead of relying on male family 

members. Finally, Payments Banks are adopting a ﬁmobile-

˜rstﬂ strategy and incentivizing mobile use by waiving fees on 

cashless purchases with merchants (using their mobile phones 

or debit cards) while charging for cash withdrawals. This aims at 

encouraging greater use of mobile payments and less reliance on 

cash transactions. In addition, Payments Banks offer competitive 

prices for remittances sent through their mobile platforms, 

which might encourage adoption among women workers who 

complained about the high fees charged by agents.

 
Basic savings accounts 
One of the key differentiators between Payments Banks and 
mobile wallet companies is that Payments Banks allow customers 

to hold deposits and receive interest on a savings account.˛To 

encourage more low-income women to use formal accounts, 

Payments Banks offer interest rates that are 2
-4 percent higher 
on savings than those offered by traditional banks. For instance, 

while most traditional banks offer a 3.5-4 percent interest rate, 

Airtel Payments Bank offers a 7.25 percent interest rate  on 
savings.
52˛This could be an incentive for women to start saving a 
portion of their salaries in accounts offered by Payments Banks, 
instead of saving money in traditional banks or using informal 

methods to save (or, of course, not saving at all). In addition, 

the savings accounts offered by Payments Banks don™t require 
minimum balances,
53 which makes them particularly accessible  
to low-income women.
Compared to informal savings methods, mobile ˜nancial services 
allow women greater privacy from male family members who, as 

revealed in our interviews, may appropriate the entire sum when 

a woman returns home with her salary. In addition, since women 

can access their savings accounts frequently and conveniently 

from their phones to monitor expenses, manage their budgets, 

and transfer money from their checking accounts, mobile ˜nancial 

services could increase women™s likelihood to save.

 
Other products
Although Payments Banks cannot offer credit or insurance 
directly, we believe the payments and savings options they do 

afford on mobile will serve as ˜rst step for women to ﬁgraduateﬂ to 

more advanced ˜nancial products. Along the way, utilizing mobile 

˜nancial services should help women build the ˜nancial histories 

they need to access products such as credit and insurance.
Financial Inclusion for Women
 I Drivers, Barriers, and Opportunities I 
21An evaluation of India™s Mobile Payments Platforms
In the following table we examine Mobile Payments Platforms by accessibility, 
affordability, and ﬁappropriatenessﬂ: 
Accessibility.
 Products and services are considered accessible if there are easy 
to obtain and to use. The number of physical access points and merchants that 

accept payments, as well as the possibility to access products and services with 

both smartphones and basic phonesŠand in local languagesŠwill determine if a 

Mobile Payments Platform is considered accessible. 
Affordability.
 Fee structure needs to be affordable for a garment factory worker to 
provide bene˜ts such as interest on savings and to be ˚exible with perks such as 

no minimum balance requirement. Areas where fees can be reduced or eliminated 

completely include cash withdrawals, savings, and remittances to name a few.
Appropriateness.
 Products and service offerings are considered ﬁappropriateﬂ if 
they meet a speci˜c need of women.
Physical access points can include the following: 

Bank Branch: A retail location where a˜˚nancial services institution offers 
customers a wide array of face-to-face and automated services.
Business Correspondent: Third-party, non-bank retail agents engaged by 
˚nancial services institutions to provide banking services at locations other 

than a branch or ATM. 
ATM: An automatic teller machine, or ATM, is a machine that dispenses cash 
or performs other banking services after an account holder inserts a bank card 

and inserts a personal identi˚cation number, or PIN. ATMs are often located in

bank branches, but can also be located near a factory or in a city center.
Financial Inclusion for Women
 I Drivers, Barriers, and Opportunities I 
22ACCESSIBILITY
APPROPRIATENESS
AFFORDABILITY
CURRENT 
PLATFORMS
PHONE 
REQUIREMENTS
PHYSICAL
ACCESS
POINTS
MERCHANTS 
THAT ACCEPT 
CASHLESS 
PAYMENTS
AVAILABLE 
LANGUAGES
SERVICES
OFFERED
( AVAILABLE
ONLINE)
SERVICES 
THROUGH 
BUSINESS 
CORRESPONDENTS 
NETWORK
BANKING FEES 
(NON-EXHAUSTIVE LIST)
Airtel 
Payments 

Bank
Basic phone 
OR
Smartphone
500,000 Business

Correspondents 
2.3 million 

merchants
Smartphone 

users:

English

and Hindi 
Non smart
-phone users: 
12 languages
- Savings Account 

- Wallet

- Debit Card 

- Payments

- Remittances

- Personal Insurance

- Credit (through 3rd party)

- Funds (through 3rd party)
- Account opening

- Cash withdrawal

  and deposits 

- Remittances

- Bill Payments
- Withdrawal: 0.65% of 
  withdrawal amount

- Remittances: Free to Airtel 

  Payments Bank accounts.   

  For other banks, ˜xed-fee   

  depending on amount. 

- Interest on Savings: 7.25%
BHIM
(Bharat 

Interface 

for Money)
Basic phone 
OR
Smartphone
No access points 

but can link app to 

one of the 60 partner 

banks and bene˜t 

from the access 

points of that bank.
121 merchants     

(including    

e-commerce)
13 

languages
- Payments

- Remittances

- Banking (through 3rd party)

- Wallet (through 3rd party)

- Insurance (through 3rd party)

- Funds (through 3rd party)
No business

correspondent 

network
No fees to use BHIM app. 

Bank linked to BHIM app can 

charge fees for transactions 

made through the app.
Fino Pay
-ment Bank
No available 

information
- 422 Branches 

- 25,000 

  Business

  Correspondents

- 5000 Business

  Correspondents     

  at BPCL petrol   

  outlets

- 1000 micro 

   ATMs
25,000 

merchants
English

and

Hindi
- Savings Account

- Checkings Account

- Wallet

- Debit Card

- Payments

- Remittances

- Insurance (through 3rd party)

- Credit  (through 3rd party)

- International Remittance    

  (through 3rd party)
- Account opening

- Cash withdrawal    

   and deposits

- Remittances

- Bill Payments

- Recharges

- Travel Bookings 
- Interest on Savings: not yet   
  announced but will be lower 

  than 7%

- Withdrawal : At ATM, up 

  to 3 free withdrawals, then 

  Rs. 20. At a branch, 2 free 

  transactions per month; 

  after that Rs.5 per 1000.

  At an agent, 0.6% of  

  transaction or minimum Rs 5.

- Remittances : Free to Fino 

  accounts, Rs.10 to other   

  banks.
India Post 
Payments 

Bank 

(IPPB)
No available 
information
- 650 Branches to   

   be launched by

   April 2018

- 8 Business      

  Correspondents 

  (The target is for 

  the 155,000  

  post of˜ces 

  to offer these 

  services by April 

  2018)

- 978 ATMs
No
available 

information
No
available 

information
Mobile app not yet available
- Account opening 

- Cash deposit and 

   withdrawals 

- Remittances 

- Bill Payments

- Recharges

- Balance inquiry
- Interest on Savings:  5.5% 
- Withdrawals : Free in India 

  Post and Punjab National 

  Bank™s ATMs

- Remittances: 2 free 

  remittances per month
Jio 
Payments 

Bank
Smartphone
Not yet
launched
Not available 

because the 

app has not 

been launched 

yet
No
available 

information
Not yet launched - full list of  

products to be de˜ned
Not yet launched
 No available information
Paytm 
Payments 

Bank
Basic phone 
OR
Smartphone
- 1 branch 

- 100,000 Business 

   Correspondents 

   expected
5 million 

merchants
English,

and

10 regional 

languages
- Savings Account 

- Checkings Account

- Wallet

- Debit card 

- Payments

- Remittances

- Insurance  (thorugh 3rd party) 

- Credit (through 3rd party) 

- Funds (through 3rd party)
- Account opening 

- Cash deposit and 

   withdrawals

- Cross-sell ˜nancial 

   products 
- Interest on Savings: 4%
- Withdrawal : up to 3 free 

   withdrawals in metro area/up 

   to 5 in non-metro area; then 

   Rs.20 per transaction

- Remittances: Free to Paytm 

  customers. 3% to other 

  banks. Fees depend on each   

  Business Correspondent   

  terms. 
AN EVALUATION OF INDIA™S 
MOBILE PAYMENTS PLATFORMS
RECOMMENDATIONS:
This report has made the case that investments in mobile ˜nancial 
services provide a compelling opportunity to expand ˜nancial inclusion 

among women workers in India™s garment sector. Our research 

indicates that mobile products are not only more convenient and safer 

for women to adopt, but also can provide a point of entry for low-

income women to start using a full range of quality ˜nancial services.
Still, as we have outlined, barriers remain for women to access and 
use mobile ˜nancial products and services.
This section provides a set of recommendations tailored for 
key stakeholders to help remove some of these barriers. These 

stakeholders include mobile ˜nancial services providers, apparel 

brands and their suppliers, donors, NGOs, and ˜nancial inclusion 

experts. While government and regulators are crucial to the effort of 

creating an enabling environment for mobile ˜nancial inclusion, they 

were not part of the scope on this phase on the research. Our hope is 

that the efforts toward ˜nancial inclusion will increase women™s agency 

and improve the quality of life for low-income women across India. 
Addressing Social and Gender Norms 
It is important to understand and address the social and gender norms that contribute to current realities surrounding 
women and ˜nancial services in India. 

As noted in the previous section, many of these everyday facets of life stand in the way of women accessing and using 

technology in general. Others limit women™s participation in household ˜nancial decision-making.
Too often stakeholders take a gender-neutral approach to ˜nancial inclusionŠan approach that fails to acknowledge 
women may face unique constraints. Any organization working to improve ˜nancial inclusion for women should strive to 

understand where and how gender norms in˚uence digital ˜nancial inclusion and consider which approach addresses 

these gender norms best. For some, this might mean acknowledging existing social norms and designing solutions to 

work around them. For others, it might mean ˜ghting to change norms by engaging people in the community directly 
through education and advocacy efforts.
54Financial Inclusion for Women
 I Recommendations I 
25Through researching this paper we learned a lot about 
the current state of the mobile ˜nancial services sector 

in India, and were able to get ˜rst-person feedback 

about how to overcome some of the barriers to ˜nancial 

inclusion that women customers face today. Here are 

some recommendations for ˜nancial services providers 

based on that feedback.
Digitize the payments women make most frequently. 
In India, women still rely on cash because so many 

merchants do not yet accept digital payments. To 

increase women™s use of mobile, service providers 

should focus on digitizing the payments for which women 

tend to be most frequently responsible. These fees 

can include (but in no way are limited to) school fees, 

groceries, and utilities. If mobile payments are relevant for 

female garment workers, they will have a clear incentive 

to use them.
Design products and services for women.
 Service 
providers should use a gender lens when designing 

new products. In order to design products for women, 

˜nancial services providers need to unpack these gender 

norms and try to understand why they act as barriers to 
access and use of ˜nancial products and services.
55 In 
addition, ˜nancial services providers must engage with 
women directly to understand their needs, behaviors, 

and preferences, and try to create value though products 

that will solve their pain points. Finally, designing ˜nancial 

products that meet women workers™ needs and address 

speci˜c gender barriers to women™s empowerment 

is a good business opportunity for ˜nancial services 

providers to target the large untapped market of low 

income women. 
Invest in training, education, and awareness-building.
 Our research revealed that female garment workers 

lack awareness of mobile products, services, and 

technologies, and don™t trust or feel comfortable using 

them. To increase usage among low-income adults, 

particularly women, service providers should invest in 

education and awareness-building. Education efforts 

can also help women become more active smartphone 

users, opening up greater market opportunities for 

mobile money providers. 
RECOMMENDATIONS FOR MOBILE FINANCIAL 

SERVICES PROVIDERS
One of the most effective ways that garment workers 

learn and adopt new technologies is through their peers 

and coworkers. This is why ˜nancial service providers 

should leverage women to train other women. One of the 

ways to do this is to hire more female salespeople and 

agents who can help educate and support women in 

their use of mobile products. 
Ensure privacy and security.
 To encourage women to 
use mobile ˜nancial services, providers should ensure 
that women can access agent networks conveniently 

and securely. Research suggests that women feel more 
comfortable with female banking agents.
56
 In addition, 
providers can take other steps to make women feel 
more con˜dent, such as allowing women customers 

to recharge airtime credit without revealing their phone 
numbers to retailers, who are often men.
57 Invest in the customer experience.
 Many women 
workers may be ˜rst-time users of mobile ˜nancial 

services, which means they likely will have less advanced 

˜nancial and technological skills. They also may have 

lower levels of literacy and numeracy, and they may 

distrust ˜nancial services. Providers should focus on 

building women™s trust by offering products that are safe 

and reliable by avoiding service downtime, inadequate 

data protection, insuf˜cient agent liquidity, and by 

ensuring terms and conditions are transparent. The 

key is excellent customer support, because a negative 

experience can set mobile ˜nancial services providers 

back years in terms of customer acquisition.
Financial Inclusion for Women
 I Recommendations I 
26Given the potential for increasing ˜nancial inclusion of women 
through the garment sector, apparel brands and their suppliers 

in India are key stakeholders in this evolution. Here are some 

recommendations for apparel brands and their suppliers.
Consider efforts beyond the digital payment of wages.
  Digitizing wages makes business sense because it eliminates 

the costs related to handling cash (e.g., hiring security and 

administering cash payroll), increases safety for employers 

and workers alike, and allows for greater transparency in wage 

payments. In India, however, virtually all garment workers in 

the formal sector now have access to basic bank accounts 

through which they are receiving wages. While digitizing wages 

is the ˜rst step toward ˜nancial inclusion, it is not the end goal. 

The next steps for international apparel brands and the Indian 

factories from which they source are to focus on driving use 

and reducing the burden of cash, especially among women. 
To tackle this issue, brands and factories should make sure 
workers understand how to use their bank accounts, and 

they should provide support if workers have trouble. A good 

example: Factories can appoint staff to assist workers with 

troubleshooting, address concerns, and collect feedback. 

Given that many women workers are likely to be ˜rst-time 

users, and given that they have lower levels of technical 

experience and literacy, factories should include at least one 

woman on their support teams to build trust with female 

employees. 
Use the workplace as a platform to advance ˜nancial 
inclusion.
 Given that garment factories convene large numbers 
of women, brands and factories are uniquely positioned to 

deliver ˜nancial education and awareness-raising programs. 

These entities can also shape attitudes and behaviors toward 

˜nancial services. Factories should invest in programs that 

train workersŠparticularly womenŠon how to use traditional 

bank accounts and mobile ˜nancial services, as well as other 

˜nancial products and services. With these programs available 

in the workplace, women who have limited free-time outside 

of work will be able to participate. As a female garment worker 

from Bengaluru told us: ﬁWe don™t know how to use a phone 

[to pay bills], we work for six days a week, and we don™t have 

time [to learn].ﬂ 
Garment brands and factories can invite ˜nancial service 
providers to come and answer workers™ questions, allay 

concerns about using mobile products, and to provide 

technical support. Factories can also run awareness

campaigns to encourage more merchants to accept digital

payments and to mobilize workers to ask for mobile payment

options. In our experience implementing HERproject in 

Bangladesh, when workers start asking merchants about 

digital payments, more merchants offer this option.
RECOMMENDATIONS FOR APPAREL BRANDS 

AND THE FACTORIES THAT SUPPLY THEM
Our research also has enabled us to piece together 
recommendations for donors, NGOs, and ˜nancial 

inclusion experts. 
Invest in research on women™s use of mobile ˜nancial 
services and the associated gender gap.
 We already 

know Indian women are lagging behind Indian men in 

their use of formal ˜nancial services, especially those 

delivered through digital channels. According to the 

World Bank™s Global Findex, while account penetration 

in India increased to 53 percent in 2014 from 35 percent 

in 2011, the ˜nancial inclusion gender gap increased as 

well, to 20 percent from 17 percent during that same 

time. Given that much of that increase was driven by 

mobile technology, mobile ˜nancial services actually 

widened the divide between men and women in India 

because the efforts to push for a ﬁDigital Indiaﬂ have 
been gender-neutral.
58  To overcome the barriers inhibiting women from using 
mobile ˜nancial products and services, we need to 

understand what the challenges really are. Donors and 
RECOMMENDATIONS FOR DONORS, NGOs, 

AND FINANCIAL INCLUSION EXPERTS
experts can invest in research on the gender and social 

norms preventing Indian women from participating 

in the formal ˜nancial system fully. More information 

about how social norms affect attitudes and behaviors 

of women will help the ˜nancial inclusion community 

develop effective strategies, products, and services that 

account for these limitations. Also, this research needs 

to include an understanding of the unintended negative 

consequences that mobile ˜nancial inclusion might have 

on women. 
Coordinate stakeholders to drive a holistic approach 
to the ˜nancial inclusion of women.
 Donors and 

experts can help align interests and approaches by 

buyers, suppliers, service providers, policymakers, 

and regulators. Doing so will help the ˜nancial 

inclusion community collaborate to ensure systems are 

established so more women use digital products and 

services actively. Coordination among all stakeholders 

could help governments deliver more bene˜ts via digital 

transfers, and could encourage more merchants to 

accept digital payments.  
In addition to the recommendations in the preceding section, our 
research has implications for BSR™s HER˜nance initiative. In this 

section, we examine the opportunities for HER˜nance to address 

the challenges Indian women workers face in using ˜nancial 

services, and similar challenges women workers face in other 

countries around the world.
Considering this was our ˜rst foray into the subject of ˜nancial 
services, we took a narrow focus in our research, using a qualitative 

approach including interviews and focus groups to look at women in 

India™s garment factories. In the future, we plan to pursue additional 

research to build on this foundation. In particular, we will look at 

how mobile ˜nancial services could be introduced to garment 

workers through their employers, what support would be necessary 

to increase use, how existing products and services could be 

enhanced to meet the needs of women workers, and more. 

Subsequent research projects also will take into account existing 

social norms, and how new programs could support women™s 

˜nancial autonomy and agency.
IMPLICATIONS OF RESEARCH 

FOR HERFINANCE
Financial Inclusion for Women
 I Implications of HER˜nance I 
29Informed by the ˜ndings of that research, 
BSR will work with 
garment brands and factories, mobile ˜nancial services 

providers, and local NGOs to introduce garment workers to 

mobile ˜nancial services. We will also strive to drive use among 

women through supporting activities such as training and the 

development of a network of merchants and agents. 
BSR plans 

to support these efforts by piloting programs inside factories with 

one or more Payments Banks. In addition, based on the results 

of our research, we could assess the extent to which products 

and services Payments Banks offer currently are aligned with 

women™s needs. We could even investigate whether we need to 

collaborate to redesign them.
More speci˜cally, we plan to:
1. Explore a formal partnership with one or more Payments 
Banks that are willing to pilot their products and services 

with garment workers. These providers must be willing to 

respond to the ˜ndings and recommendations that come 

from quantitative and qualitative research. They also must 

agree to assist the HERproject team work to more concretely 

de˜ne the needs of garment workers.
2.
 Collaborate with one or more buyers to select ˜ve factories 

in the Delhi/NCR area for a feasibility pilot. We chose to 

conduct the pilot in Delhi/NCR since this is where there 

are the most merchants who accept mobile payments, 

and where workers have the highest awareness of such 

products. Although the majority of the garment workforce in 

this area is male, we will ensure that all research and testing 

is conducted with an equal number of male and female 

participants, so we can draw out gender speci˜c lessons to 

be applied in other markets.
3.
 Open Payments Banks accounts for garment workers. While 

their salaries will not be deposited into these accounts, we 

will provide them with training using the HERproject peer-

education methodology to raise awareness and drive usage.
4. Team up with Payments Banks to build use cases for 

garment workers. This could involve digitization of key 

payment streams normally managed by women, targeting 

merchant outreach in garment communities around the 

pilot factories and developing complementary products and 

services such as insurance or small loans.
5. Measure the uptake of mobile payments among garment 

workers and merchants, as well as the impact this has on 

women™s use of other formal ˜nancial services. We also will 

measure women™s perceptions and preferences in their use 

of mobile payments versus cash to test our hypothesis that 

mobile payments will create value for women.
Our hope is that this phase of research and piloting will reveal 

persistent barriers so we can address them and overcome 

them. We plan to publish these ˜ndings to share our lessons and 

recommendations with the wider ˜nancial inclusion community.
Financial Inclusion for Women
 I Appendix I 
30Methodology
The recommendations in this report stem from desk-based review of industry trends and government policies, as 
well as qualitative interviews and focus groups discussions. Here is an overview of the interviews we conducted.
 »Interviews and focus group discussions with 59 garment workers from ˜ve garment factories located in 

three hubs of garment manufacturing in India: Two factories in the Delhi/National Capital Region (NCR); 

one in Bengaluru, in the state of Karnataka; and two others in the Tirupur/Coimbatore area in Tamil Nadu.
 »Interviews with 15 factory managers.
 »Interviews with ˜ve merchants in garment communities surrounding the garment factories.
 »Interviews with seven ˜nancial service providers, largely (though not exclusively) those that were granted 

licenses to operate Payments Banks.
 »Interviews with seven subject matter experts in the areas of ˜nancial inclusion and mobile ˜nancial 

services in India.
Appendix
ABOUT THIS RESEARCH
GLOSSARY
Aadhaar
 Œ A universal identity infrastructure issued by the Unique Identi˜cation Authority of India (UIDAI), which consists of 
an individual number linked to the biometric data (˜ngerprints, iris images, and photos) of each Indian citizen.
59Access Points Œ Can refer to the business correspondents, bank branches, and ATMs that allow for customers to conduct 
˜nancial transactions.
Agents
 Œ  Any third-party acting on behalf of a bank, ˜nancial institution, or non-bank institution (including a Mobile Money 
issuer or other payment services provider) to deal directly with customers under contractual agreement.
60Business Correspondents
 Œ Retail agents engaged by banks for providing banking services at locations other than a bank 
branch or ATM.
61Cash Out
 Œ The process of converting electronic value or e-money for cash.
Demonetization
 Œ On November 8, 2016, the government of India announced that high-denomination Rupee bills would 
be left out of circulation. The purposes of this action were to control the shadow economy and halt use of counterfeit 
currencies to promote terrorist activities.
DFS (Digital Financial Services)
 Œ DFS refer to ˜nancial services (including payments, credit, savings, remittances, and 
insurance) that can be accessed and delivered through digital channels. The term ﬁdigital channelsﬂ refers to the internet, 
mobile phones (both smartphones and digital-feature phones), ATMs, POS terminals, electronically enabled cards, and 
biometric devices, among others.
62
Know Your Customer
 Œ The process of a bank or of a business to verify the identity of its client.
Financial Inclusion for Women
 I Appendix I 
31Mobile Banking - The use of a mobile phone to access banking services and execute ˜nancial transactions. This 
covers both transactional services such as transferring funds, and non-transactional services such as viewing ˜nancial 
information on a mobile phone.
63MFS (Mobile Financial Services
) Œ The broad range of ˜nancial services (including payments, credit, savings, remittances, 
and insurance) that can be accessed and delivered through a mobile phone or a tablet. Within DFS, we can ˜nd mobile 
˜nancial services (MFS) that usually employ agents and the networks of other third-party intermediaries to improve 
accessibility and lower the overall service delivery cost.
64Mobile Money
 Œ A term describing the services that allow electronic money transactions over a mobile phone.
Mobile Network Operators Œ
 A company that has a government-issued license to provide telecommunications services 
through mobile devices. Due to their experience with high-volume, low-value transactions and large networks of airtime 

distributors, mobile network operators have been critical players in digital ˜nancial services.
65Mobile Payment
 Œ Payments where the complete transaction of sending and receiving money is carried out using a mobile 
phone or a tablet.
Mobile Wallet
 Œ A payment service through which businesses and individuals can receive and send money via mobile 
devices such as a mobile phone. 

Payments Banks 
Œ Branchless institutions that provide basic banking services through a combination of digital channels 
and a network of business correspondents, or agents, who extend the bank services to communities and homes. These 

banks are primarily intended to reach low-income, underserved customers and cannot offer credit.
Point of Sale
 Œ A software or electronic device used for the purpose of processing card payments at retail locations by 
reading information from a customer™s credit or debit card. 
Pradhan Mantri Jan Dhan Yojana (PMJDY
) Œ A program launched by the Indian government to bring formal ˜nancial 
services to all households in the country.
Financial Inclusion for Women
 I Appendix I 
32References
1.  http://documents.worldbank.org/curated/en/187761468179367706/The-Global-Findex-Database-2014-measuring-˜nancial-inclusion-around-the-
world. Accessed December, 2017. 
2. Ibid.3. Ibid. 4. Ibid. 5. https://siteresources.worldbank.org/INTFINFORALL/Resources/4099583-1194373512632/FFA_book.pdf. Accessed January 2018. 
6. http://www.un.org/sustainabledevelopment/sustainable-development-goals. Accessed September 15, 2017. 
7. http://www.fao.org/news/story/en/item/460267/icode. Accessed January 11, 2018. 
8. http://˜nclusion.org/uploads/˜le/reports/InterMedia%20FII%20Gender%20Report.pdf. Accessed December 2017. 
9. https://www.omidyar.com/sites/default/˜les/˜le_archive/Pdfs/16-09-29_Infographic_India_Gender_Gap_FINAL.pdf. Accessed December 2017. 
10. Ibid. 11. http://˜nclusion.org/uploads/˜le/reports/2015%20InterMedia%20FII%20INDIA%20QuickSights%20Summary%20Report.pdf. Accessed Jun 2017. 
12. https://www.omidyar.com/sites/default/˜les/˜le_archive/Pdfs/16-09-29_Infographic_India_Gender_Gap_FINAL.pdf. Accessed December 2017. 
13. https://pmjdy.gov.in/account. Accessed December 2017. 
14. https://timeso˜ndia.indiatimes.com/business/india-business/Jan-Dhan-covers-99-7-households/articleshow/45960195.cms. Accessed January 11, 
2018. 15. Receiving deposit up to INR `100,000, issuing ATM cards, facilitating payments and remittances, internet banking. 
16. ﬁShort-changed.ﬂ˛The Economist, November 26, 2016. www.economist.com/news/˜nance-and-economics/21710838-crackdown-indias-black-

economy-makes-life-harder-everyone-india-grapples. 
17. http://˜nclusion.org/uploads/˜le/reports/2015%20InterMedia%20FII%20INDIA%20QuickSights%20Summary%20Report.pdf. Accessed June 2017. 
18. Ibid. 19. Jaleel, Tania and  Devansh Sharma. 2017. ﬁA year after note ban, cashless economy is still a distant dreamﬂ, The Economic Times. November, 7, 

2017. https://economictimes.indiatimes.com/wealth/spend/a-year-after-note-ban-cashless-economy-is-still-a-distant-dream/articleshow/61541013.

cms. 20. https://www.womensworldbanking.org/wp -content/uploads/2017/07/India_Women_Digital_Financial_Services2017_WomensWorldBanking.pdf. 

Accessed January 2018. 21. (Jaleel and Sharma, 2017). 22. https://docs.gatesfoundation.org/documents/g20%20report_˜nal.pdf. Accessed January 2018. 
23. www.gsmaintelligence.com/research/?˜le=134a1688cdaf49cfc73432e2f52b2dbe&download. Accessed May 4, 2017. 
24. http://www.gsmaintelligence.com/research/?˜le=134a1688cdaf49cfc73432e2f52b2dbe&download. Accessed May 4, 2017. 
25. Ibid. 26. http://www.livemint.com/Industry/FKUxmYNwlF6bfwIGumMuVJ/India-Post-Payments-Bank-will-keep-operations-simple-CEO-As.html. Accessed 

May 4, 2017. 27. http://www.gsmaintelligence.com/research/?˜le=134a1688cdaf49cfc73432e2f52b2dbe&download. Accessed May 4, 2017. 
28. http://www.gsma.com/mobilefordevelopment/wp-content/uploads/2016/02/Connected-Women-Gender-Gap.pdf. Accessed May 4, 2017. 
29. http://pmjdy.gov.in/trend-zero. Accessed December 5, 2017. 
30. http://b2bimages.iimg.in/˜les/retail_˜les/reports/data_˜le-China-dominates-the-global-Textile-Apparel-exports-with-40-share-1434619354.pdf . 

Accessed January, 2018. 
31. Ibid. 32. http://b2bimages.iimg.in/˜les/retail_˜les/reports/data_˜le-China-dominates-the-global-Textile-Apparel-exports-with-40-share-1434619354.pdf . 

Accessed January, 2018. 
33. http://www.ilo.org/wcmsp5/groups/public/@ed_norm/@declaration/documents/publication/wcms_379775.pdf. Accessed May 5, 2017. 
34. https://cleanclothes.org/resources/publications/factsheets/india-factsheet-february-2015.pdf. Accessed March 30, 2017. 
35. Formal employment generally refers to employment that is recognized by the government and therefore taxed and regulated and makes employees 

eligible for public bene˜ts. 36. https://www.gsma.com/mobilefordevelopment/wp-content/uploads/2016/02/Connected-Women-Gender-Gap.pdf. Accessed January 2018. 
37. http://stats.oecd.org/index.aspx?queryid=54757#. OECD.38. http://scholar.harvard.edu/˜les/rpande/˜les/on_her_account.can_strengthening_womens_˜nancial_control_boost_female_labor_supply.pdf. 

Accessed in February, 2018.
39. https://docs.gatesfoundation.org/documents/g20%20report_˜nal.pdf. Accessed January 2018.
40. Breza, Emily, Martin Kanz, and Leora Klapper (2017), The Real Effects of Electronic Wage Payments. (Upcoming).
41. http://˜nclusion.org/uploads/˜le/reports/InterMedia%20FII%20Wave%203%202015%20India.pdf. Accessed May 4, 2017.
42. https://www.census2011.co.in/literacy.php. Accessed February, 2018.
43. https://ora.ox.ac.uk/objects/uuid:1167e5bc-573b-44d8-a94f-b9b9aaea32c8. Accessed February, 2018.
44. https://www.icrw.org/wp-content/uploads/2017/11/Gender-and-digital-˜nancial-inclusion.pdf. Accessed January, 2018.
45. Women™s World Banking, ﬁResearch Report: Financial Education Needs Assessment of Factory Employees in India,ﬂ prepared for BSR, April 2013.
46. https://www.icrw.org/wp-content/uploads/2017/11/Gender-and-digital-˜nancial-inclusion.pdf. Accessed January, 2018.
47. https://www.gp˜.org/sites/default/˜les/documents/03-Digital%20Financial%20Solution%20to%20Advance%20Women....pdf. Accessed November 

2017.48. https://blog.paytm.com/looking-back-at-2017-top-10-interesting-facts-from-paytm-7bc59e08683f. Accessed February 2018.
Financial Inclusion for Women
 I Appendix I 
3349. http://www.slideshare.net/ProductNation/indian-banking-in-a-time-for-change-nandan-nilekani-64679460. Accessed May 5, 2017.
50. Anand, Nupur. 2017. ﬁIndia has a new bank designed speci˜cally for Indians afraid of banksﬂ, Quartz. July 11, 2017. https://qz.com/1021591/˜no-
paytech-india-has-a-new-payments-bank-designed-speci˜cally-for-indians-afraid-of-banks/
51. ﬁPaytm gets ˜nal nod from RBI to launch payments bank,ﬂ Hindustan Times, updated January 4, 2017. Accessed May 5, 2017. http://www.

hindustantimes.com/business-news/paytm-gets-˜nal-nod-from-rbi-to-launch-paytm-payments-bank/story-mwbotX9ZhjzJMZg7gWvNmL.html. 

Accessed May 5, 2017.52. http://www.livemint.com/Industry/bvQa9dbOiZxQA6DBXNazoJ/How-does-India-Post-Payments-Bank-stack-up-against-Airtel-Pa.html. Accessed 

May 5, 2017˛?53. http://www.rbi.org.in/Scripts/FAQView.aspx?Id=96. Accessed January 2016.
54. http://www.cgap.org/sites/default/˜les/Brief-Social-Norms-Change-for-Womens-Financial-Inclusion-Jul-2017_0.pdf. Accessed January 2018.
55. https://www.icrw.org/wp-content/uploads/2017/11/Gender-and-digital-˜nancial-inclusion.pdf. Accessed January 2018.
56. http://www.cgap.org/blog/why-women-self-help-group-members-make-good-bank-agents. Accessed January 2018.
57. http://www.˜nancialexpress.com/industry/technology/vodafone-launches-sakhi-pack-for-women-now-recharge-without-revealing-mobile-

number/763330. Accessed January 2018.58. https://www.womensworldbanking.org/news/blog/what-you-need-to-know-about-women-in-india-to-serve-them-with-digital-˜nancial-services. 

Accessed January 2018.59. UIDAI public data available on www.uidai.in.gov
60. http://www.a˜-global.org/sites/default/˜les/publications/2016-08/Guideline%20Note-19%20DFS-Terminology.pdf. Accessed May 5, 2017.
61. https://www.rbi.org.in/scripts/bs_viewcontent.aspx?Id=2234.
62. http://www.a˜-global.org/sites/default/˜les/publications/2016-08/Guideline%20Note-19%20DFS-Terminology.pdf. Accessed May 5, 2017.
63. Ibid.64. Ibid.65. Ibid.BSR™s HERproject is a collaborative 
initiative that strives to empower  

low-income women working in 

global supply chains. Bringing 

together global brands, their 

suppliers, and local NGOs, 

HERproject drives impact for women 

and business via workplace-based 

interventions on health, ˜nancial 

inclusion, and gender equality. Since 

its inception in 2007, HERproject 

has worked in more than 700 

workplaces across 14 countries, 

and has increased the well-being, 

con˜dence, and economic potential 

of more than 800,000 women.
Learn more at www.herproject.org.
