Financial Inclusion for WomenExpanding Mobile Financial Servicesin India™s Garment SectorResearch ReportAbout this ReportThis report examines the opportunity to expand ˜nancial inclusion for women in India's garment sector by increasing women's use of mobile financial products and services. The report is based on a combination of desk-based literature review, and qualitative research sessions conducted in India by the HERproject team.
More than 2 billion adults still do not use formal ˜nancial services such as deposit and savings accounts, payment services, loans, and insurance. In India, 58 percent of women owned at least one bank account as of 2015, but only 35 percent of these women were using that account, compared to  49 percent of men.
India has the world's largest number of ˜nancially excluded women. 280 million women in India don't have access to formal ˜nancial services. 60 percent of Indian women have at least one bank account. Only 40 percent of women actively use a ˜ nancial services account of any kind.
In India, only six in 10 women have a savings account in their own names. This means there are an estimated 280 million unbanked women. Recent changes in regulations and policy are addressing many of the barriers low-income women face in accessing and using mobile ˜nancial services.
Indian women still lag behind by eight percentage points in account ownership. Fewer than four out of  10 Indian women actively use their bank accounts. Indian adults lack awareness of mobile money, have low SIM-card ownership, and don't have strong incentives to use cashless modes of payments since most merchants don't accept them.
After agriculture, the garment and textiles industry is India™s second-largest employer. The readymade garment sector employs 12 million workers, mainly in urban and semi-urban clusters. The largest garment manufacturing centers are in Bengaluru (Karnataka), Tirupur and Chennai (Tamil Nadu), and the National Capital Region (NCR)
This report reveals our ˜ndings to date, including the barriers and opportunities to increase the use of mobile ˜nancial services among female garment workers. We also analyze the potential of these products and services in meeting women™s needs. In addition to working six days a week in factories, women shoulder most of the responsibility for unpaid work with family.
Workers often carry large sums of cash to make payments or to save at home. Women respondents told us that when they received cash wages, they were more likely to spend their money and less likely to save. Nearly all Indian adults have access to a mobile phone, either because they own one or because they borrow one from family and friends.
Most women we interviewed followed traditional Indian gender roles that posit women administering the money (running errands and paying bills) and men deciding how to spend it. Most women working in garment factories struggle with reading and writing and have poor knowledge of English. Existing mobile money apps are not always available in local languages. Most merchants still don™t accept digital payments for large expenses.
Currently, low-income women in India are underserved by traditional banks. The Reserve Bank of India allows mobile network operators and other associated companies to create Payments Banks. Payments Banks are allowed to offer the following products (accessible from a mobile phone): »Mobile payments (including remittances, bill payments, and payments to merchants) »Savings account with a balance of up to INR  100 , 000 (around US$ 1 , 500 ) generating interest.
Payments Banks are developing networks of merchants that have speci˜c contracts with companies˛to accept these payment instruments. Customers can make cashless payments at these identi˜ed merchants at no charge by using mobile phones or debit cards provided by the banks. Women can use mobile payments to pay bills, send remittances, receive government bene˜ts, or recharge their phones without leaving their homes.
Financial Inclusion for Women I Drivers, Barriers, and Opportunities I  22 ACCESSIBILITYAPPROPRIATENESSAFFORDABILITYCURRENT PLATFORMSPHONE REQUIREMENTSPHYSICALACCESSPOINTSMERCHANTS THAT ACCEPT CASHLESS PAYMENTSAVAILABLE LANGUAGESSERVICESOFFERED( AVAILableONLINE)
Report: Mobile products are more convenient and safer for women to adopt. Research indicates that mobile products can provide a point of entry for low-income women to start using a full range of quality ˜nancial services. Report: It is important to understand and address the social and gender norms that contribute to current realities surrounding women and ˜ nancial services in India.
Female garment workers lack awareness of mobile products, services, and technologies. Many women workers may be ˜rst-time users of mobile ˜nancial services. They also may have lower levels of literacy and numeracy. Digitizing wages makes business sense because it eliminates costs related to handling cash.
Indian women are lagging behind Indian men in their use of formal ˜nancial services, especially those delivered through digital channels. The efforts to push for a digital India have been gender-neutral. To overcome the barriers inhibiting women, we need to understand what the challenges really are.
Team up with Payments Banks to build use cases for garment workers. Measure uptake of mobile payments among garment workers and merchants. Measure the impact this has on women's use of other formal ˜nancial services. Measure women's perceptions and preferences in their use of mobile Payments versus cash.
Financial Inclusion for Women I Appendix I  32 References 1 .  http://documents.worldbank.org/curated/en/ 187761468179367706. Pradhan Mantri Jan Dhan Yojana (PMJDY) is a program launched by the Indian government to bring formal ˜nancial services to all households in the country.
China dominates the globalTextile-Apparel-exports-with- 40 -share- 1434619354. Formal employment generally refers to employment that is recognized by the government and therefore taxed and regulated and makes employees eligible for public bene˜ts. The Real Effects of Electronic Wage Payments (Upcoming)
50 . Anand, Nupur.  2017 . ﬁIndia has a new bank designed speci˜cally for Indians afraid of banks, Quartz. 51 . Paytm gets ˜nal nod from RBI to launch payments bank, Hindustan Times. 52 . http://www.cgap.org/blog/why-women-self-help-group-members-make-good-bank-agents.